---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: JavaScript a language of the internet
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2021-09-01
labels:
  - Javscript
  - Learning
---

Initial Impressions:
	Before this class I didn’t know much about JavaScript, but I always heard it was useful for web design and internet applications.  Being familiar with several other programming languages I thought maybe this meant JavaScript would be somehow much different than other languages.  I’m sure that there is a lot more for me to learn about why this is true, but my initial impression is that it isn’t nearly as different than I thought it would be.  We were told beforehand that we would likely have a strong opinion on the language after using it, but personally I didn't find it that much different than other languages.

There are still variables, there are still constants, functions and pretty much all the things you would expect if you have used other languages such as C or Java.  The main difference that I saw was it just seems a lot simpler when it comes to datatype. Instead of hard lines and strong definitions, in JavaScript data can be passed around and automatically handled.  For example, variables do not have to be defined as int, or strings, but rather we can just kind of suggest a variable exists with the “let” statement and feed it whatever value that we’d like. JavaScript will automatically determine the type.  I suppose this should be mind-blowing and simplify things drastically in certain applications, but I feel like I have seen this before in other untyped programming languages, and it nice because I know it avoids many potential problems.  I also wonder if sometimes this could potentially be confusing and lead to issues in the future with unintentionally assigning the wrong data-types when your not in direct control.  In theory it sounds great, but I still wonder if in practice it will be as great as it sounds.

What I find interesting is that if this is supposed to be the language to be used on the internet, I expected it to be a lot more static HTML, but it runs loops with variables and all the other dynamic things a programming language has, overall it just seemed like a more flexible version Java or C++. I think of it as as the brain behind the operations in most web pages. It can react to what users input, run programs, change what appears in front of them, and more. 

Similarly to other programming languages, when it doesn’t work out the way you want, you have to look at your code critically to find the problem. Then you have to come up with solutions. Coding in any language helps you look for details that may be causing an issue. Going hand in hand with that is creativity. Coding teaches us to be more creative in our thinking. Sometimes your first idea won’t work and you have to trace your code til you find your solution.  Often time these problems challenge us to be more creative when we are looking for ways to change, improve or fix our code.  One of the concepts I still haven’t figured out is how to quickly and easily track and trace variables and set break points, but that is probably more of an IDE feature than a feature of the language.  I’m sure I will figure out more of that as the semester progresses.
	
WODs and Althletic Coding challenges:
Here is an example of one of the first WOD's I performed for this class. I find the concept fun almost like a game, and I also know that I tend to take much longer than I should on many things, so forcing myself to do it in a quicker timeframe can be useful for optimizing the amount of time I have available to perform tasks in a day.  I am hoping this will help me be a faster programmer, but also know that there is a lot of value to taking your time when it comes to coding.  I find taking it slower can potentially save hours of headache in the long run.  I might spend hours tracing code only to find my problem could have been avoided if just took my time and coded a little bit slower.

JavaScript:


	function projectEulerOne(max)
	{
		let total = 0;
  		let i = 0;
  		while (i < max)
  		{
  			if ((i % 3 === 0) || (i % 5 === 0))
    			{
    				total += i;
    			}
    		i++;
  		} 
  	return total;
	}

	let pr= projectEulerOne(1000);
	console.log("the total is : " + pr);



2021-09-01
