---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: Brains of Steel
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2021-12-15
labels:
  - Frameworks
  - Semanitic UI
  - React
  - Meteor
  - WOD
---

<H1>Brains of Steel: Brain Training with Phillip “The Chalk” Johnson </H1>
<H2>Get it? Because teachers used to use chalk and its kind of like Dwayne “The Rock” Johnson?  Aww nevermind… </H2>

When I think back to the days of my first WODs it almost seems like ancient history. WOD stands for “Workout of the Day” for those not ICS314 Savvy, and they are a timed programming exercise with a partner.  No screen sharing, no outside help, just two near strangers on an all or nothing quest to help each other solve a timed programming puzzle over Discord.  At first it was pretty terrifying, not only your grade, but your partners grade depends on both your abilities to solve this puzzle and with the slightest mistake, your potential 100 points instantly becomes 0 points.  Stakes are high, nerves were tense, every Thursday morning the teacher would say “Its Thursday, you know what that means guys?”, and the class despite always knowing exactly what we were doing would never answer, as if we wouldn't have the WOD if nobody said the word.  It would always happen anyways, even when we thought it wouldn’t, it still happened. After several months these tense heart pounding mental aerobics became a little less heart pounding.  

Whether we knew it or not we were being conditioned to the fast paced intense exercises and our minds had adapted to stay focused.  We were usually able to knock out the solution and have it uploaded to git hub in the time frame.  The intensity and pressure began to fade as the WODs became commonplace, we became Software Engineering body builders.  The semester started off with JavaScript in a broswer based compiler known only as “JSFiddle”, it was archaic and clunky yet simple and comforting in a way.  As time rolled on we were doing coding in IntelliJ IDEA and loading it to git hub.  The first few commits were nerve wracking, coming in just under the time frame, the dreaded “unborn head” error occasionally derailing your entire project. Meteor and react came in and installing the application in terminal became the new nightmare.  Waiting helplessly as meteor installs to your project directory every week.  On my computer this would take as much as five minutes, but it seemed like an hour, and every minute you spend waiting for meteor to install and the app to build and everything to load was one less minute you could spend solving your WOD.

This helpless waiting soon became normal, at I thought about pre-installing meteor to a template directory and having it ready to go, but just as I asked our esteemed TA if that was a viable option it was announced we would now be using a meteor template off github every week.  This sounded like a godsend, but I soon found that the difficulty of the WODs was going to scale so that the extra time from using the template was going to be spent actually thinking and solving the problem, instead of relaxing while meteor installs.  This move had been clearly calculated, and our weekly workout just got one less breather in the routine.  We were no longer sitting by idly while installing software, we were thinking critically about the solution.  We now had databases running in the background and information being displayed in the foreground, we were branching and commuting on git hub, it was conducting a symphony of software components. 

Then Thursday rolled around and it was annouced this would be our last WOD.  As much as it surprised me I was a little bit sad.  Was I really going to miss my weekly computer cardio?  Well I never had time to find out because what replaced these weekly workouts was the meteor marathon we had been unknowingly training, expect this wasnt a marathon, it wasn’t a triathlon, it was a month long decathlon testing our knowledge in at least ten different areas.  It sounded intense, but we were put on teams with the fellow digital athletes that I had been training with for all those weeks.  With these teams we were in theory able to accomplish more than we could individually, but as we were about to discover group projects come with their own set of problems we had yet to discover.  What if one person commits broken code to the main branch on github? What happens if the part you are working on is incompatible with the part someone else is?  What happens if there are overlapping commits or “conflicts” or your work gets deleted by someone else upload or a group member disappears, their computer breaks, there is no audio on their microphone or they never check their discord messages.  These are all new challenges we faced as a team and overcame together.  I know now we overcame because we got our grades today and manged to receive an A, well A- technically, but in my book that's still a success and I was happy to see that we had all come together as a team to demonstrate a semester of learning.  At times it was frustrating for everyone, but we all had the shared trauma of the WODs in common and we came together and helped each other succeed like we had done for each other all semester.  In the end it wasn’t always the technical knowledge that made our project a success, it was the ability to work together, under pressure, as a team that got us through it.  

